This is August 7, 1987. I'm Bob Cornish, and I'm
interviewing Wolfgang Roessler in his office at
Texas A&M Department of Urban and Regional
Planning. I'd like to begin, Wolf, by asking you
about your studies in planning, where you did your
work in academia. and your degrees, and then how
you came to be in the United States. By airplane.
Thanks.
Well,
I earned my doctorate at the University of Hesse,
Marburg, in economics and sociology with an
emphasis on urban planning. notably
transportation planning. In fact, my
dissertation was one of the first computer
modeling attempts of that period and had to do with
measuring the cost effectiveness of commuting
versus resettlement. That was the era when there
were large numbers of homeless people all over
Europe, all over Western Europe, millions of
them. There was a very current issue. What do you do
with these people? They mostly lived
helter-skelter, and wherever there was some
quarters, there were camps thrown up overnight by
the various government and military, government
forces, and people lived in little towns, and they
If I work in nearby communities, it was just a
survival kind of thing. What year was that? That
was the whole period from 1946 to 1948.
And during that period, this quite
coincidentally, I became interested in that
issue of resettlement versus leaving people
where they are and strengthening commuting
facilities.
a number of applied research projects I was
involved in. So that's how all this fitted
together. And then I did receive a scholarship
from the University of Wisconsin through the U.S.
military government in the state of Hessen and
Professor Howard Becker, who is a noted
sociologist, period. So I went to Madison,
Wisconsin, on that, and that's where I met Walter
Blucher on a trip to Chicago. And Walter Blucher
said, why don't you stay here? You could make a
contribution, particularly with the skills that
you have in computer applications to
transportation. Why should you do that? And one
thing led to another. There were, at that time, two
jobs open in the United States. One was in
Louisville, Kentucky, and the other one in Kansas
City. I like Kansas City, and so I went there. And my
assignment, first assignment was to develop a
comprehensive analysis of future travel demand
patterns that was to become the basis of the urban
freeway system for Kansas City. And then, of
course, leading to all the other related
considerations of economic and social policy and
land use planning policy at the local level and
whatnot. And
before I knew it, I was an active member in the old
American Institute of Planners. And that was a
very pleasant experience. It was a very small
congenial group of highly competent people. in
contrast to what the mass organizations later
deteriorated into. Anyway, it was a very pleasant
experience, and it helped me shape my own career
objectives. When did you become associated with
Ladislas Segal? Oh, that was much later. Much
later. After the first Kansas City tour, I became
planning director in Palm Springs. And that was a
very interesting experience. What year was that?
That was 53. And then I went with Segal in 58. And
in between I had done another study for Kansas City
that there was a huge annexation north of the
Missouri River and in Jackson County. And then
eventually went with him. I met him along the way at
meetings. through some committee work in the AIP.
So one day he offered me a job and I joined his firm.
And then you moved to Cincinnati. I moved to
Cincinnati.
From Palm Springs. And that was actually
professionally the experience that led me into
the consulting business for the rest of my career.
And we worked all over the place. And of course, he
was very much avant-garde in the plumbing
profession. We had a lot of common interests. And
it was easy for us to work together. And so I did
dozens of master plans on a lot of interesting
studies in San Francisco and Seattle. around
Washington, D.C., in
specialized areas. Like, for instance, this
building envelope business that we were, again,
applying in the San Antonio River works that came
out of that period. Segal taught me how to do that in
connection with the project in Seattle, and then
another one in Cincinnati, sort of his thing. It
had to be done very painstakingly. He was not,
anyhow, a typical planner in the sense that the
majority of the people in the profession defined
themselves in practice. He was always
determined to solve problems. And he said,
somebody comes to you, and he says, I want to
comprehend the plan. But mostly, that's really
nonsense. They really don't know what they want.
But somewhere, there is a problem. And then it's
your opportunity, when you identify this, to
teach them how to relate all of these different
aspects to each other. And that then makes it truly
comprehensive rather than going through a ritual
of five or six steps that so typically show up in all
these planning reports. Well, I could relate to
that. And so I think we're a very successful team.
However, for some reason,
Nazi Sieger wasn't interested in getting into the
major transportation studies of that period, and
I was interested in that at the time. So when Ruben
Bergendorff asked
if I would join their company as a planning
director... For the transcriber, how do you spell
Bergendorff? B-E-R-G-E-N-D-O-F-F. It's a
Swedish name. I took over that whole business, and
I did consider a number of huge transportation
studies. I had, at times, 150 people working for me
all over the world, literally, in this country, in
Australia, and you know, wherever you are. So,
that was fine, but somewhere along the way, I had
hoped to spent the last several years of my career
productively in an academic environment. And I
had several offers and didn't really do much about
it. And eventually, Jack Williams, who was
president of Texas A&M at the time, offered me this
position here as head of this department. I wasn't
too interested in this because I told him I didn't
really care to have more administrative
responsibilities, but as it turned out, I spent
two-thirds of my time at A&M with administrative
details, which hopefully will come to an end
sooner or later. So I came here. Why did Jack
Williams want you to come to A&M? Jack Williams was
dismayed. He said he wasn't... he had lots of
problems with the College of Architecture, and he
didn't feel that the Department of Urban and
Regional Planning, as it was called, really had
the strengths that he thought it should have, and
it didn't perform to his satisfaction. There had
been apparently a lot of unpleasant experiences
with faculty and administrators and whatever.
It's not worth even remembering, but it was a
situation that had given the department and the
college had, in part two, a reputation of being
odd, being not worth it, dealing with things that
they shouldn't be concerned with, having more
individual members, more concerned with
headline hunting and politics and teaching,
producing quality education, at least in the
views of the
Since he knew my general attitude and what I
thought of what I might do with planning
education, and it has to have a meaningful linkage
to reality and so on, and has to produce people who
can, in fact, perform effectively immediately
upon completion of their academic work, He said, I
should try that. We'll give that department one
more chance. If you can do something with it, then
everybody will be happy. If not, no harm done. I
came in 1975,
that summer. So Virgil had been interim
department head for the spring and the summer.
Virgil was the interim department head. And
what I found was preposterous.
financial administrative mess, that they were
defunding totally inadequate. And the first
thing I did is I had a meeting with the then vice
president for academic affairs, John Calhoun,
and told him that, and asked him one role, dean of
faculties. And I said, I spent more money in my
little plumbing firm in one week than I did here to
spend the whole year. And it's ridiculous. They
agreed, and they asked Dean Reed why it was, and he
had no meaningful answer except that he didn't
really care, I think. However, through
intervention by the vice president, that was
corrected for the academic year that was about to
get underway, and so at least I had some funds for
running of the office. and supporting
financially some of the graduate students
through assistance shows. And that helped the
morale considerably. The students were
marvelous. They were extremely supportive. I met
with them. I told them what I had in mind and that
some things had to be changed. There had to be a
basis established, a discipline, operation. and
we had to operate just like we operate in a public or
private planning office and not impossible way
that things were running in all directions and
there was no objective no goal or any such thing and
much to my surprise three members of the faculty
were very opposed to any such change but with the
help of the students we accomplished it anyway and
uh I don't think I want to get into that. And it was
pathetic, really pathetic. They all eventually
joined
the more productive part of the faculty.
And gradually, we managed to establish something
that resembled a professional unit. It was also
clear to me in 1975 that the traditional planning
program was passé and no longer served a useful
purpose. There was hardly anybody who would
employ people who knew nothing about how to make
land use surveys and they had to learn something
better than that. And so we instituted the
emphasis areas in planning. which other schools
had done successfully, and that helped us
strengthen our position. We also did another
thing. We decided that all laboratories would
have to be sponsored by some outside agency so that
faculty and students had the opportunity to
practice their trade and remain up-to-date.
However, I felt that we had to add some other
programs to the department. There was some
discussion about an undergraduate program, but
the university administration was adverse to
that, and I could get very little support for any
kind of undergraduate program. But when I raised
the question of a PhD, I was immediately given a
great deal of support Vice President's office,
and they said, yes, that's the kind of thing we want
in academic orientation. And there was a doctoral
program called the Doctor of Environmental
Design, which is a low-grade professional
program. And I thought that that should be
discontinued. And the faculty agreed with that.
And so we simply changed the requirements for that
degree to the PhD requirements in the traditional
sense, and eventually asked the administration
and the state board, the Texas College and
University Board, to change the title to PhD in
Urban Regional Science. That has helped us
tremendously, and we were able to build, over the
years, a fairly effective doctoral program on a
tutorial basis. The products of that program had
by now reached substantial, significant
positions in academia and industry and
government, and so they proved a point. That was
the first Ph.D. in the college. It was the first
Ph.D. in the college, and it was logical. It had a
broad enough basis.
procedures that
had originally been initiated by the University
of Wisconsin by Ratcliffe in his program on land
economics, and later expanded substantially
into what is now called regional science. So we
used that, but we added another dimension. Since
the regional science and land economic programs
highly quantitative, almost entirely
quantitative. We felt we needed another
dimension. We simply called it urban science,
which is broad and doesn't commit us to anything.
So the degree can go into either direction. And it
has done this very well. We've had some
discussions. Some dissertations have dealt with
policy issues. Some have dealt with law. And some
have dealt with, many have dealt typical
traditional regional science issues, highly
quantitative. So that went on for a while. And by
the early 1980s, the department's enrollment had
increased from the original around 30 to about 60
students.
And that was considered pretty substantial for a
graduate department.
The next phase of the early 80s, 82, 83, I had a lot of
health problems and resigned from the department
head position, and David Pugh took over at that
time. Upon my recovery, about 60, no, I mean 84, did
I say 60?
We had, again, reached the point where
something needed to be done to invigorate the
master's level programs. And
for various reasons and developments around the
country, it seemed appropriate to take a look at
one of our emphasis areas and that was the emphasis
on land development and it had become so popular
with the students that
the then provost gordon eaton suggested that we
give this planning emphasis its own identity and
so we came up with the master science and land
development i managed it through the university
and state minefields and got it eventually
approved. That didn't take very long, did it? No,
it was a record time. In eight months, I think, we
got the whole thing through. Eight months. And,
yeah, I was... We had a real fine relationship
during that period, the faculty, with the
provost. He was interested in our work, and he
pretty much let us do anything we wanted to that was
reasonable. And so that was accomplished. And
with that, then, the departmental enrollment
increased substantially and is now generally
between 90 and a little over 100 students. And at
first, perhaps unexpected, the
enrollment in the MS program was at the expense of
the MUP program. David Pugh and I knew that this
would find its level, and we weren't overly
concerned about it. Others were, but we were
right. It found its balance, and for the last two
years, the two master's programs have had about
the same enrollment. Another interesting
experience from this was that, since there is
commonality, first semester students can...
change to the other program if they want to after
they get to know things a little better and again
there seems to be no trend of going from one to the
other it seems some people just prefer the
traditional city planning others prefer the
entrepreneurial land development but as many
stand now the doctor program has about 40 percent
of the enrollment and the two master's programs,
each about 30% of the enrollment. That, for our
present faculty, is manageable. We couldn't
manage these many students were it not for the
interdisciplinary character of the MS program
and the doctoral program. Faculty in the business
college and in the engineering college Some in
liberal arts are as much involved with us and with
these students as our own faculty. So my outlook
for the future is that this will probably continue
to remain like this with greater and greater
emphasis on the doctoral program. You can read it
in the Wall Street Journal periodically and
Forbes and other magazines. There's pressure in
industry and pressure in government that
higher-level management positions, not only
research positions, somehow require that the
candidates have a doctorate. And that's not just
in our field, it's just everywhere. there's more
demand for this and from the faculty's point of
view presents all too good because there's more
money in it by the same token the masters programs i
think will also increase simply because of the
goals of the nation and and opportunities that
seem to be very plentiful we have had no period, to
my knowledge, where our students did not find
jobs. They all did. Yes, even in this era of
downturned Texas economy, there doesn't seem to
be much problem. There seems to be no problem for
the planners in Texas. There seems to be a little
problem for the land development graduates, But
they have found ready acceptance in California,
in Florida, in the Northeast, in Washington, D.C.
There are plenty of jobs. In fact, people come all
the way from Miami to interview here and have hired
our people. State agencies such as the Texas Real
Estate Commission have recognized the degree as
satisfying all of the academic requirements for
any of the licenses under their jurisdiction. The
California Real Estate Commission has also
accepted that, and so we're in good standing with
the major regulatory agencies. The Urban Land
Institute has recognized us in a recent article.
We were listed together with MIT and the
University of Wisconsin and the University of
Southern California as one of five schools that
actually teach land development. One other thing
I should mention, if you know on and off, I observed
this interim department head during the last
three and a half years, because our department
head, Sweeney, is the interim dean. Another thing
that happened about four years ago, we thought
that the university needed some assistance in
helping it achieve its own goals. Well, one of its
goals was clearly
described by a panel in the Texas 2000 report, or
whatever they called the thing, was that Texas A&M
should assume a leading role in urban affairs. And
nobody knew what to do with that. So at that time, I
just thought it might be time to get all those
faculty members together who may have an urban
interest. So we organized an urban affairs
faculty as a very loose association and had a bunch
of meetings and came up with a program. One of the
program objectives was to establish a center for
urban affairs that would be capable of
contracting with anyone who wanted to render a
service, and the service would be provided by all
these experts from the different disciplines.
And it's worked out beautifully. We've had the
regents allowed us to do that, and we've had any
number of fascinating engagements with private
interests, And with the major cities in the state,
San Antonio has sort of become our undisputed
headquarters for numerous activities. And I
finished in Gordon-Eccles recently the
Riverwalk project. We've been involved in all
kinds of projects. And just about anybody on the
faculty who wanted to had a chance to do that. We
created professional advisory boards one for the
Master of Urban Planning, and the five members are
recognized planners of the region, and we created
another one for the Master of Science in Land
Development Program. It was composed of leaders
in the industry. For example, Michael Crow joined
us last week as a member, and so we have... I think
being able to demonstrate to everyone that we can
make a contribution, the university does not
question that at all, and has supported us
effectively, I think. The profession has
recognized our contribution, which has been very
substantial. In our recent accreditation visit,
there were numerous statements made that without
Texas A&M, there would be no Texas chapter. And the
Texas chapter depends on Texas A&M for numerous
things, not only for the contributions of
everyone in the faculty, but also for other short
course in this matter. I think one can't ask for
more. I would think that the state of affairs of the
department is excellent at this point.
Were no longer threatened by the administration?
Not threatened by anybody. On the contrary. With
being dismissed from the ranks of the university?
No. No, in fact, on the contrary. Since about 1980,
I think, the university has made peace with that
and said the program is very solid. And Dr.
Eaton was particularly vocal about that and
pointed that out on various occasions. Would you
want to comment on the relationship of the
planning degree programs to the dean's office.
You mentioned Ray Reed, and he was relieved by
Charlie Hicks. And we had another relationship
there. And then Charlie was relieved by Don
Sweeney. And our fortunes have varied
substantially, it seems, depending upon who was
occupying the dean's chair. Well, you would
expect that. It's the nature of it. The academic
organization is simply that the university
administration depends on the deans to carry out
their policies, and consequently the deans have
substantial power with respect to budget
control, and that's really where the key issue
lies. Reed and Hicks were very weak deans who
didn't even understand their own profession.
They learned the function of a dean. They were
ineffective. It is tragic that the presidents of
the period were not interested in the College of
Architecture, or they would have done something
about that. They took more the position as long as
they don't bother us over there i know they're a
little bit crazy but they don't bother us we leave
them alone and that was the attitude now that's no
longer the case it has changed completely in fact
again i would give gordon eaton credit for having
changed that dramatically and you know saying i
want to see the same uh recognition of that college
and productivity as everywhere else the college
was not as a whole productive in my judgment it was
has I can find a lot of thought with it. And it is now,
in the last three careers, I think, finally gotten
to a point where, at the departmental level,
efforts have been made to raise its prestige and
standards. And I think Don Sweeney, as an interim
dean, has done a good job in creating a
business-like image of the college, and where
they don't have the feeling anymore that this is
just a group of rather strange individuals, and
they wouldn't want to even do it. They pay
attention to us, and they treat us with respect.
And people who perform, who do what is expected of
an academic person, are well-treated by the
central administration. That has changed
completely, and we hope that with the new dean who
is coming in in January, that will continue and be
further strengthened. Many of the faculty under
Ray Reed and Charlie Hicks had the feeling that
urban planning was simply not understood by the
Deans. Not only did they not understand it, but
they didn't really much care about it. Well, I'll
tell you what happened there. That was true, they
didn't understand Deans and understand their own
world, but since I had established at Adam early on
that I wasn't going to knuckle under to these
deans, and I would go to the provost, if need be, and
get what I think we had to have in order to do our job.
They hated that. They were very resentful of that.
And the moment they had an opportunity to undo
what had been gained, they did. And it wasn't until
fairly recently that I found out, for instance,
that the construction science department
received, under Hicks, allocations for graduate
assistantships in the amount of about $2,400 per
capita, whereas we got $500 per capita. It was
outright fraudulent. And it is very, really very
sad that a central administration allowed these
things to be so badly mismanaged. I think if you
wanted a classic case of mismanagement, this
college has ample material. In the form of several
individuals.
That was rumored for some time. about this
imbalance between the various departments under
Hooke's regime, Hicks regime, but it was only a
rumor circulating. And as such, of course, it
caused a lot of concern and resentment. Well, it
was even more tragic with respect to faculty
compensation. You're talking to one who suffered
from it. It was just unbelievable what was done to
us. And, well, this is past history. The important
thing, I suppose, is that the Department of Health
and Regional Planning and its two
Creation Center for Urban Affairs and the Center
for Historic Resources are going to be heard from
in the future. They are a major unit, a major entity
of urban affairs and urban planning in the
southwestern United States. And the interesting
thing is, as much as we were
mistreated by our own deans, the outside world had
looked upon us with great They were awed by all the
accomplishments of the individual faculty and of
the students. Our students have a tremendous
reputation. The department looks like a giant
from the outside. And I think it will be more so in
the future. I have great hopes for that. And of
course, with some of our students having reached
and attained positions of prominence, that
hasn't hurt us. Henry Cisneros in San Antonio, and
I'm sure Henry Cisneros would be the next governor
of the state of Texas. And then he would appoint
some of the regents, not appoint some others.
Right.
Some of your comments do recall for me the
attitudes at the time during previous dean
checks. And it seemed to me and to others on the
planning faculty that the more we tried to do the
more it seemed to be resented not only by the
college at the college level but at the university
level and i think you hit on one point earlier that
when you arrived here there was a lot of sort of
grandstanding and i think that the university was
a bit gun-shy of any faculty doing anything that
would involve publicity, and that they might have
overreacted to faculty trying to do something.
That's very true, and I think that's probably why
the administrations that I served under and I had
an easy time of working together because, you
know, in the consulting business, you learn very
quickly, and it becomes second nature to Stay in
the background. Your client takes the credit.
Your client is the great hero, and you do the work.
And I adopted and continued the same policy, and it
worked very well for us because nobody criticized
us for grandstanding effect. Now I hear the other
side, they say, you ought to move your own horn a
little bit more. You ought to tell the world what
you're doing. I'd rather have it this way than the
other way around. Well, now that we have three
solid degree programs in the department, and we
have created two university-wide centers, and we
have other accolades such as David Pugh being
president-elect of the Texas chapter of APA, and
I've been on the board of trustees of the Society
for American City and Regional Planning History,
and so forth. All of these things seem to be coming
into being in a very solid way. How do you take a look
at the future with a new dean coming on board and Don
Sweeney returning to the department as our
permanent department head in January? What do you
foresee for the future?
You pointed out a very important thing, that
topology has played a leading role in the
professions at the national level. Don Sweeney
works at the Health Association. I'm sure you know
also the director of the American Clown
Association. I served as the director of the, what
do you call it, Educators Association of
Collegiate Schools of Clowning. So we've all done
these things. Now we have kind of regrouped,
decided that you can't do everything. Everybody
can't do everything. So Chewy and David Pugh
continue to concentrate on the American Planning
Association, American Institute of Certified
Planners. You do the newly created Society of
Planning Historians. Sweeney does the public
health thing. I deal with the Irwin Manor
Institute. So we all do different things. I also
deal with the Institute of Traffic Engineers, and
then I'm a fellow in that institute. And so is
Virgil Stover. We've covered that. So that I think
our, as a faculty, our reputation is truly
national. And we continue to broaden this. The
only way you can redo this is through a lot of
publication. And I think our faculty, hopefully,
will learn that. That is extremely critical.
We have added a research dimension to the faculty
with Nabil Safat, who has outstanding
credentials.
is very much involved with the National Science
Foundation on econometric and transportation
theory issues and so we continue to do that next
year when you retire we will undoubtedly attempt
to find a planner with substantial theoretical
credentials as well similar to Nabil and thereby
round out the capacity of the department. I would
also look for the two centers to develop some
staffs over the next two years on a permanent basis
so that, let's say, by the end of this decade, by the
time that I expect to retire, we will have created
not only a strong academic unit with an enrollment
of somewhere between 120 and 150 persons but we
also have created two adequately staffed
research centers and outreach centers we will do
more on an international basis we are very much in
demand Fulbright grants are available to us.
The AID has approached us again for assistance.
And so we're involved with a number of foreign
universities. And again, our former students are
now in leading positions with some of these
universities. So it is a network. And I would
expect us to do more of this, to network
internationally and both in the academic
teaching area and in the research area. We were
recently approached by an Australian group to,
Michael McCarthy, to assist them in developing a
land development program. So I think all of these
outreach activities will improve our prestige
and strengths, and with that, also give us an
entirely different position in the college and in
the university. I have every reason to believe
that Michael McCarthy will be very supportive of
that, affecting conversations I had with him and
in exchange of correspondence.
continues to express that and also express his
admiration in a way that we were able to do all these
things with such limited means and i think that he
is accustomed to much more adequate and much more
liberal budgets he would press for that and so i
think that the future of the department will be
very, very good. It sends to the national scene a
return to common sense and urban affairs after the
Reagan fiascos. I think the public is ready for
solid contributions from the planning
profession and to a large extent under the
leadership of the major universities, where the
intellectual capacity is to deal with the issues
that are sometimes seemingly insurmountable. I
think we had a backlash in the early Reagan years of
anti-climbing, anti-everything, and that's
long gone. You can see it in very conservative
regions like Texas. Climbing is alive and very
well, and the public says, plan and don't just
waste our money with ridiculous schemes. There's
this whole issue of the aging population,
including you and me, that is an area that we
haven't even effectively addressed at all. And
it's a major planning consideration, policy
planning and physical facilities and all the rest
of it. So I think that the opportunities are
tremendous. In transportation, we'll be getting
into the high-speed train era, as the Europeans
have. You can't build any more airports. There's
no room. How many airplanes can you have in the sky
at any one time? And they're all in trouble right
now. They're all in trouble. And so I think that
technology new modes in transportation, new
public policy, new social policy issues that
simply are not wishful thinking or response to
fantasies, but response to enormous needs. When I
read in the Wall Street Journal that it costs
something like $25,000 to accommodate
someone in an acceptable retirement home, I mean,
where is all this going to lead to? That's where I
think planners come in. And I think having laid the
foundation in our period, you and I, with three
very solid programs that all relate to that and
interrelate,
the future of this planning program will be
tremendous. I think it will be a major function on
campus and also a place where people will compete
for appointments because it would be very
desirable to be a part of this entity. Not that it
hasn't always been. I think that that is probably
our greatest strength. I think we've all felt
great satisfaction working together, and we're
very proud of each other. You mentioned one point
regarding The Reagan administration and so
forth. And it seems to me that both Nixon and Reagan
have succeeded eventually. It's resulted in
removing the planning responsibility from HUD.
And all they're concentrating on now is housing.
And affordable housing, I think, is the current
buzzword. It seems to me that there has to be some
federal agency that has some interest in planning
as such around the country. And that's got to come
back again in some format. And if it doesn't at the
federal level, I think that the universities, as
you've entered, have a responsibility. to play
that they haven't had before. And there's a vacuum
that somebody's going to fill. Yeah, the
universities are the only place where you can
really create the intellectual and research base
for all these activities. It has to be somewhere in
the executive branch, a central urban planning
office, whatever it's called. HUD So my prejudice
is they have never really done anything
worthwhile since its inception. It was well
intended, but it's been a disaster. And then the
developments in the housing market, financial
developments have undermined it to the point
where it's almost really useless. It has to be...